[Music]
this is Zeno of Elea an ancient Greek
philosopher famous for inventing a
number of paradoxes arguments that seem
logical but whose conclusion is absurd
or contradictory for more than two
thousand years Zeno's mind-bending
riddles have inspired mathematicians and
philosophers to better understand the
nature of infinity one of the best-known
of xenos problems is called
the dichotomy paradox which means the
paradox of cutting in two in ancient
Greek it goes something like this after
a long day of sitting around thinking
Zeno decides to walk from his house to
the park the fresh air clears his mind
and helps him think better in order to
get to the park he first has to get
halfway to the park this portion of his
journey takes some finite amount of time
once he gets to the halfway point he
needs to walk half the remaining
distance again this takes a finite
amount of time once he gets there he
still needs to walk half the distance
that's left which takes another finite
amount of time this happens again and
again and again you can see that we can
keep going like this forever
dividing whatever distance is left into
smaller and smaller pieces each of which
takes some finite time to traverse so
how long does it take sino to get to the
park well to find out we need to add the
times of each of the pieces of the
journey the problem is there are
infinitely many of these finite sized
pieces so shouldn't the total time be
infinity this argument by the way is
completely general it says that
traveling from any location to any other
location should take an infinite amount
of time in other words it says that all
motion is impossible this conclusion is
clearly absurd but where is the flaw in
the logic to resolve the paradox it
helps to turn the story into a math
problem let's suppose that xenos house
is one mile from the park and that Zeno
walks at 1 mile per hour common sense
tells us that the time for the journey
should be 1 hour but let's look at
things from xenos point of view and
divide up the journey into pieces the
first half of the journey takes half an
hour the next part takes quarter of an
hour the third part takes an eighth of
an hour and so on summing
all these times we get a series that
looks like this now xeno might say since
there are infinitely many terms on the
right-hand side of the equation and each
individual term is finite the sum should
equal infinity right this is the problem
with zeros argument as mathematicians
have since realized it is possible to
add up infinitely many finite sized
terms and still get a finite answer how
you ask well let's think of it this way
let's start with the square that has
area one unit now let's chop the square
in half and then chop the remaining half
in half and so on while we're doing this
let's keep track of the areas of the
pieces the first slice makes two parts
each was an area of 1/2 the next slice
divides one of those halves in half and
so on but no matter how many times we
slice up the boxes the total area is
still the sum of the areas of all the
pieces now you can see why we chose this
particular way of cutting up the square
we've obtained the same infinite series
as we had for the time of xenos journey
as we construct more and more blue
pieces to use the math jargon as we take
the limit as n tends to infinity the
entire square becomes covered with blue
but the area of the square is just one
unit and so the infinite sum must equal
going back to zeros journey we can now
see how the paradox is resolved not only
does the infinite series sum to a finite
answer but that finite answer is the
same one that common sense tells us is
true
Zeno's journey takes one hour
[Music]
you